[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Stress is part of life.
But before it gets
to be too much,
it's time to take
care of yourself.
Self-care is not selfish.
This is "Gaia News."
We all experience stress.
It's hardwired into our DNA.
The fight or flight response
is within each of us.
But when you've been
cooped up too long
or events outside your control
weigh too heavily on your mind,
it can all be too much.
Mental stress can have
serious negative effects
on your physical health.
That is why it's important
to take care of yourself,
especially if you
take care of others.
Or if you are the type of
empath that others lean on,
you need to take a break.
To help others, you must
first help yourself.
Naturopathic medical
doctor, Donese Worden,
on stress and our bodies.
>> It helps us guide us
into that next phase.
When it becomes
a problem is when
it's chronic, when it's just
continual level of stress.
When we have that,
we build up cortisol
and all the other
hormones that affect
our sex hormones,
testosterone, progesterone,
estrogen for men and women.
Then we've got a mess
with a hormone balance,
and it happened
really from stress.
Many other things
that it causes.
But we've got to remember
that our body's pretty smart.
Sometimes that stress in
a short period of time,
even if it's really high,
can be helpful for us.
>> What are some of the physical
effects of chronic stress?
>> Some of the effects of
chronic stress is your body
thinks it needs to run
from the bear all the time.
That it's in fight
or flight, and it
doesn't get into the
parasympathetic, which is
where we heal and repair DNA.
So when we're turned on
in that stress piece,
and literally telling
our body we're in danger,
all of those good things get
shut off for the sake of,
let's survive.
When we do that, it
causes inflammation,
the stress hormones rise.
>> Is it selfish to want to
take a break when you are taking
care of other people?
>> Self-care is not
something that you're doing
that's selfish.
How do you care for
others if you are not
caring for yourself?
Why do we think,
one of our tenants
as a physician is
physician heal thyself?
We have to learn not only how to
help ourselves to help others,
but we also have
to have the energy
to have the empathy and the
ability to care for others.
Social workers are high on
the list, my cancer patients.
It's their caretakers
that burn out
before the patients that have
the life-threatening illnesses.
So we have to
remember that and know
that if you're in the
driver's seat for the moment
to help someone else, you
can only do it if you're
taking care of yourself.
>> Chronic stress
can cause insomnia.
And lack of sleep
adds to stress.
How do we break
this vicious cycle?
>> Insomnia is one of the things
that will really work against
us in any situation.
Without sleep, our brain can't
detox, our body can't repair,
we can't make
hormones, we can't get
the anti-inflammatory
molecules going,
we can't repair our own DNA.
All of that happens when
we're telling our body,
we don't need to be
in survival mode,
we're in peaceful safe mode.
And it's miraculous
what the body can do.
But we need meditation
time and we need sleep time
for that to happen.
>> You don't need a spa
weekend for self care.
To recharge, sometimes it takes
as little as five minutes.
>> There are many studies
that prove that listening
to your favorite music,
taking a walk in nature,
even carving out five minutes
to really do something that you
enjoy, if it's meditation, if
it's exercise, whatever it is.
Maybe you have 30 minutes,
maybe you have an hour,
but don't think that five
minutes won't do anything
for you.
It will, it can.
Even a couple of
very deep breaths
can be really
restorative for you.
And I think when we get
stressed, we forget to breathe.
>> If it all feels like
too much right now,
what can one do if we feel
like we are spiraling?
>> And if you spend more time
in what you can do right now
instead of what you can't do,
you'll be empowered to say,
hey, I'm going to come out of
this and I'm and have learned
something and I'll be a
wiser person because of it.
And, I'll be stronger.
>> If you are feeling the
effects of chronic stress,
remember you must take care
of yourself to be able to care
for others.
Even a few minutes of
meditation, yoga or walking
in nature can help
you reset and be
ready to face the
challenges ahead.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."